Okay. Hi. Hello. Hello. We're gonna be moving
on to our next workshop which is chat
book. I don't know. We already went over
these I think so. Okay. If you go
to weblab.isexample right now, you should be able
to see our example website which has a
chat functionality here and I can chat with
anybody or I guess I can chat with
everybody here. And if I type here, I
think in theory Wait, what is Why can't
I not scroll here? Okay. In theory, yeah,
I'm seeing everybody's chat messages live kind of.
So yeah, that's pretty cool. Our goal is
basically to set up this live chat feature
in the next two workshops. My workshop or
yeah, the workshop that we're going be doing
right now is kind of more of a
review of everything that we've learned so far
in React. And then in the next workshop
we're going to be covering how to incorporate
sockets into the chat so that it actually
has a live updating feature like you see
here. Cool. The end product of this workshop
will look pretty similar to the Catbook feed
actually, except we're going to be moving a
lot quicker through all the steps and we're
going to be building all the front end
and the back end in a single workshop.
So it'll be a little bit more conceptual
and also a little bit just faster moving
basically. Yeah, so before we get started, maybe
take a few moments to just jot down
how might you design a component tree for
a chat, a live chat, something like this.
Where would you split up the page and
then what kind of components might you need
to display the chat onto the screen like
that? If you want to discuss or write
it down or whatever you want, draw it
out, do whatever you want. I'll give a
bit of time. As you can see, we
have an all chat here where you can
chat with everybody and then you can also
chat with individual users as well. So hopefully
we can incorporate that functionality too. So hopefully
you spent a little bit of time doing
that. This is what our componentry looks like
right now with a feed profile and an
not found page as well as a nav
bar. And this is what the componentry for
our chat book is going to look like.
We'll have a chat list, chat, and underneath
those we'll have single user, single message, and
new message, which we'll explain in just a
bit. So the front end plan is that
chat book will divide into a chat list
and the chat list is where you can
select which chat you want to be typing
to or look at. And then chat will
contain the actual chat messages. And then chat
list will have single user underneath it where
you can select which one you want. Chat
itself will have single message components to represent
each message and then a new message component
for you to be able to type in
messages to the chat. And then our back
end plan. So far when we've been writing
API requests, we've kind of given to you
guys what we want to do with all
of them. So this time we'll take a
little bit of time and think about how
you would actually want to design these API
requests to serve the correct information or serve
all the necessary information to the client and
also do what the client wants to do
for posting a message. So take a moment
and think about what do we need to
pass into rec. Query and rec. Body. And
then maybe what API requests need to return
to the front end, if anything. Zoom audio.
What's going on? Bro. Okay. Okay. Okay, wait
I can maybe oh, okay actually this works.
Oh, okay. Yeah, there we go. No, this
is a job. I'm sorry. Is it because
the mic is like double red? Wait. It's
like I I have my mic on on
my iPad and I have my volume off
on my computer right now. Yeah, but I
can't don't know how to turn my volume
off on my iPad. Oh, disconnect from audio.
Okay. Okay. Hello? Okay. Cool. All good. Okay.
Yeah so going back to this, for slash
chat we're just going to need a recipient
because if we're communicating with somebody then we're
going to need the person that we're communicating
with basically. So if we're looking at All
Chat we need to be like, oh, I'm
asking for the All Chat messages. We won't
need this in workshop six because we'll be
focusing on the chat component. And so we'll
only be doing the all chat feature. But
next workshop we will be incorporating this. And
then post for post we'll have to pass
in the message that we're actually posting in.
And this will happen in rec. Body. And
what we would like for the post request
to do is to update all the users
that, hey, a message has been posted. When
you post to the all chat, ideally you
want all the users to hear from the
server somehow. Oh, some message has been posted.
We won't be able to incorporate this functionality
yet without sockets, but we'll be doing that
in Workshop seven. So for now we're not
going to be returning anything. And then the
last thing that we're going to talk about
is the data representation. Generally before you start
writing any code, especially for passing in props
into any any of your functions, you want
to think about how you're representing the data
that you're passing in. And there's potentially a
lot of different ways of doing this. Even
for the website that we're creating right now,
there's probably dozens of ways of representing each
of these message objects or representing a chat,
representing user, messages. But the way that we're
going to choose to represent each of these
is for chats, we're going to represent them
using a list of messages in the form
of an array of message objects and then
a recipient, which is who we're chatting with.
And then for user objects, we're going to
need an ID and a name. I think
that one is pretty self explanatory. And then
message objects is a little bit complicated ish.
We have a sender and a content. And
the confusing thing about this is maybe that
if the sender is us, then that means
that we're sending to whoever we're chatting with.
And then if the sender is the other
person, then that would mean that they're sending
whatever message to us or to All Chat,
but one of the two. We're just going
to, I think, only do step one today.
So we're going to start by going to
our code and doing git fetch, git reset
hard, and then git checkout Workshop six step
one. I already have both npm start and
npm run dev running in separate terminals. So
if I go to 500173, you'll see that
at home I can see a lot of
different stories. And then chat, I currently see
nothing because if we go into chat. Chatbook.
Jsx, we're currently returning an empty component. So
we wouldn't see anything yet. So currently it's
empty But the display that we would like
for step one is to display the single
messages in here and then the new message
at the bottom. So we're just going to
focus on the chat window. So what props
need to be passed down from app. Js?
We're going to need to pass down the
user ID into Chatbook so that know Chatbook
knows what user to show the messages for.
And then passing down into Chat. Chat needs
to have something that represents a Chat, which
we kind of went over already. We're going
to need a chat data object here. Chat's
going to need to receive a chat data
object from Chatbook. And And then single message
will need a message object in order to
render its information. And then finally, new message
component is going need a user object so
that it knows which user it can post
the message from. So we've broken it up.
We've broken step one up into six different
sub steps. Sub steps one, two, and three
are in the lowest level, implementing new message
in single message. And then four, five, and
six are just filling in with the sub
components basically. So you can see where everything
is if you just search for to dos
in the sidebar. So you can see step
1.1, one point two, and 1.3. I'm going
to take maybe around four minutes for you
to kind of do steps one, two and
three yourselves. So I'll give you guys a
bit of time. Steps one and two are
to implement the new message component. And then
step three is populating single message given the
props that is passed out. And again, can
see here that we've outlined the single message
props to be a single message object. And
you can refer back to the slides for
what we defined for a message object or
you can look in here where we have
this definition here. It has a sender and
a content. So I'll give you a few
minutes to do that. And feel free to
call up on the queue if you have
any questions. I think I'll actually just move
on because we don't have that much time
left. Okay. Yeah, so our first step is
to our first few steps is going to
be implementing new message. So here, step 1.1
is to populate new message. We have the
new post input component already, which we've been
using for new comment and new story. So
the shared component allows us to implement a
new message pretty quickly. So we'll use the
new post input component. And then we'll pass
in default text of new message. And then
on our on submit, we need to call
our send message function. There we go. And
then we need to implement sendMessage. And for
now, we'll just log it to the console.
So we'll take in a value message, and
then we'll just console. Log. So okay. Yeah.
So continuing where we left off yesterday, we
talked about a few things. First of all,
our goal is to replicate what is webleb
dot is slash example within this workshop and
the next workshop, the chat functionality. So the
first step of that that we need to
think about is our data representation. So how
do we represent users, chats, and messages? And
what we came up with is the following
representation where we have a user represented by
an ID and a name, a message represented
by the sent by the person who sent
the message and the content of the message.
And then finally, chat data represents is what
we need to represent a chat. And for
this, we need a list of mess or
an array of messages. And then we need
to know the recipient, which is basically who
we're talking to. So the yeah. Actually, I
think the next slide might be better to
explain this. Yeah. And then the second part
we did was to basically split up our
front end and look at what the componentry
should look like. So underneath the chat, like
entire page, we have chat list and chat.
Underneath chat, we have the single message component
which displays a single message and then the
new message component which allows us to post
a new message. And that's the side of
the part that we're the tree that we're
component tree that we're focusing on for this
workshop. So to think about the props that
we need to pass into each component, we
kind of need to think about what each
component needs in order to render what's inside
of it. So for the new message object,
we need to know who am I talking
to basically. Once you send a message, you
should be able to know the server needs
to know who you're actually sending in that
message to. So the prop we need to
pass in is this user object with an
ID and name. In order to render a
single message, we need to know the sender
of the message as well as the content
of the message. So for the single message
object, the prop will just be a message
object. And then finally, for chat, the chat
needs to pass down a lit like chat
needs to maintain a list of single messages
as well as a new message. So in
order to do that, it needs a user
object to pass down to the new message
as well as a list of message objects
to create the single messages basically. Cool. Great.
And then finally, we have the back end
and we have two API routes that we
need to implement for our back end. The
first one, GET request for how we get
messages and chats from the back end. And
then the second one is a post request
for us to be able to post a
message to the back end. Yeah. So we
can reference everything that we just talked about
in weblab. Inchatbookdocs. You'll be able to see
everything that we talked about here. And this
will also be helpful for the next workshop.
So you can feel free to just keep
this open for the rest of this workshop
and next workshop as well. So let's go
to workshop six step 2v2 and open up
local host 500173. So this is kind of
where we left off yesterday. If you go
to chat, there's a conditional rendering that we've
set up so that it tells you to
log in before using Chatbook. Now after signing
in, We can see the chat. Hold on.
I don't know if I should be seeing
all of this right now. Oh, yeah. Sorry.
That would make sense. Alright. There we go.
Sorry. Okay. Cool. So currently we have some
hard coded messages in here courtesy of Abby.
And if we open up our console and
we type in a message to our console,
we can see it printed out to our
console. Yeah. There. Cool. So currently our chat
feature is missing a few things. First of
all, we are missing the ability for the
front end to change based on the state,
which we'll do in step two of the
workshop. We're missing any communication between the front
end, the back end, and the database. So
we'll do that in step three. And then
we're also missing the ability for users to
post messages to the database. And that's what
we're going do in step four. And then
finally, also want live chat updating for users
once other users have posted and individual chats.
And that's going to be done in the
next workshop. So step two, make sure you're
on this branch. We're going to be adding
a state, which is going be pretty quick.
So currently we always feed the same hardcoded
messages to the chat component. So let's change
it so that the data prop is a
state that we pass in. Yeah. So I'll
just give you guys like a few minutes
to do this. But all we want to
do is convert the prop that we're passing
into chat right now into a state. And
if you don't remember what we're supposed to
pass into chat, you can look at either
the Chatbook docs to remember what the chat
data type looks like, or you can just
look at what we're currently passing into chat.
Yeah. Cool. I'll give you guys a few
minutes to do that. Okay. Do people need
more time for this? Maybe fingers up for
a number of minutes if you need more
time. Cool. I think this one is kind
of just like a warm up. So it
shouldn't take us too long. What we want
to do is just turn this prop into
a state. So let's copy this over. We
just want to define a state which we'll
call Active Chat. And then we use the
useState hook and we can just copy paste
this in here to initialize our Active Chat
to this chat data object. And then we
can just pass it in here to Active
Chat. And hopefully we're all good. Cool. Great.
Yeah. Okay. So now this is going to
allow us to basically update whatever is in
our chat using data that either comes from
the back end or comes from when we
post a new message on the front end
as well. Yeah, let's get on the same
page. Let's check out step three v two.
And then our next step is going to
be storing and getting messages. So this is
going to be an interaction between the front
end, the back end, and MongoDB. In step
3.1, we'll add a new mongoose schema for
messages, which we'll do in message. Js. Step
two, we'll implement the apichat endpoint in api.
Js. And then steps three and four, we'll
call the apichat endpoint from the front end.
So our first step is to add a
new Mongo schema for messages. So the back
end needs a way to store the messages
in the database. And this might not look
the exact same as the way that the
front end stores messages. Why? Because the front
end only stored in the documentation we can
see that the front end only stored sender
and content. And we're going to need more
than just sender and content if we want
to store a message in the database because
if I sent a message to Kenneth, then
the database needs to store that I sent
it and also that Kenneth received it. So
I don't want to display my message to
Kenneth to every other user of the chat.
So we need both a sender and a
recipient. Well, we've kind of done this already
in the documentation or decided how we were
going to store the data. So if we
just look at oh, sorry. If we just
look at the documentation here, The way that
we're going to store these, the messages in
the database, is we're going to need a
sender, a recipient, a timestamp, and the content
of the message. So again, I'll give you
guys a few minutes to do this step
two. It's going to be in message. Js.
And we just want to define a message
schema with the fields that are in the
documentation. So reference the documentation and then just
make a message schema here that matches up
with that. I'll again give you guys a
few minutes to do that. Okay. Yeah, how
many more minutes do people need? Like maybe
if you need more minutes, just raise your
fingers. You can also just follow along as
I just do it now in case you
haven't gotten it already. No worries. Actually, live
code it first. Okay, so we're going to
need these four fields. We can actually first
just start off by copy pasting this in.
Content, we don't actually have to change at
all. But for sender and recipient, we're going
to have to look at the definition for
a user object, which is also already done
for us here in the object types. So
we have the user object needs an ID
in the name field. We'll do this here.
And then similarly for the recipient, we're going
to do the same thing. And then for
the timestamp, it'll just be type date, but
we'll also set default. Yeah, this will just
make sure that we default to the current
time if no time is given. Great. Yeah,
any questions here before we move on? Cool.
Okay. Next step is 3.2, which is implementing
the getapichat endpoint in api. Js. This is
going to be pretty similar to what we
did already in workshops three and four where
we had the back end responding to the
front end request and also communicating with the
database in the process. Okay. Sorry. I'm on
the wrong branch again. Okay. So I'll just
do this up here. I'll just live code
it here. So what what that will look
like, we define a GET request using router.
Get. And we can omit the slash API
part because we're already in API. Js. And
then for our callback function, We will be
getting a query from the client, which is
in the form of Ruck. Query. And this
query will just be a recipient ID. So
what we'll do is we'll define, We'll pull
that parameter using rec dot query dot recipient
ID. And then what do we call it
again? Message, okay. Yeah, so we'll look in
the message database for anything that matches this
ID. So here we'll just need to make
sure that the recipient's ID matches. This. And
then this will give us a response to
the database query. And then we just want
to send this to the front end using
the rest all send. Rest all send messages
here. Cool. Yeah, sorry. I forgot that we
were only doing all chats for the time
being. So yeah, for now we'll just replace
this with all chat. Any questions so far?
We've kind of done the part where the
back end interacts with the database and then
responds to the client. So our next step
is to do the part where the client
actually asks for this data from the back
end. Questions? Okay. Yeah. So the next step
is to call the slash api slash chat
endpoint, which is going be in Chatbook. Jsx.
Here we have two to dos. We kind
of just want to implement the load message
history function and then we'll call the load
message history in the use effect. So for
now, we just have this endpoint with parameters.
And the parameters is just the recipient ID.
So We'll retrieve the recipient ID by looking
at whatever our state is right now for
active chat. So currently our active chat is
initialized to this recipient and so we need
the ID of this recipient. ID of AllChat
is just the string AllChat but ideally we'd
want to pull the correct ID of the
recipient of ActiveChat. So what we can do
is take our ActiveChat state and then take
the recipient of it. And then from there,
we can grab its ID. And then we
need to figure out what we want to
do after we get the response from the
back end. And because the response is just
a list of messages, just want to set
our active chat correctly so that the messages
reflect the messages that we're getting from the
server. So we get this messages response and
we can just set Active Chat to recipient.
It should stay the same as whatever our
current recipient is. And then messages is the
messages response that we get. And now in
this useEffect, all we have to do is
just call loadMessageHistory. Let's check it out on
the front end and see if everything's working.
Cool. Great. I'll leave the solution up here.
Let me know if you have any questions
but I'll run through what's going on on
the front end just right now in the
meantime. So we have like a database set
up just by default but if you have
your own database correctly set up in the
.env then you'll see like your own database
reflected here. But here we you can see
we're chatting with All Chat. And if we
type a message into here, It'll pop up
on our console. So far we haven't yet
done the part where we're actually posting the
request to the database. That's going to be
the next step. But at the very least
we're able to communicate with the database and
grab all the messages from it at this
point. Cool. Okay. Yeah, so now we're going
to do the same thing for post requests
and I'll give you guys probably some time
to do this yourselves this time since I
walked through the GET request. So make sure
you're on the step four v two branch.
And I'll walk through the steps really quickly
for what we need to do. So step
4.1 is going to be implementing the postapismessage
endpoint in api. Js. And then step 4.2
is going to be calling that endpoint from
new post input. Jsx. You can see in
here This is to do for 4.1. And
then new post input, we have to basically
implement the send message function for a step
4.2. And it'll look kind of similar to
newcommon and newstory. So yeah, now I'll give
you guys a bit of time to do
this yourselves. A few hints for step 4.1,
a rec dot body will be a message
object, which is what we're getting from the
front end and we're going to need a
sender, a recipient and a content to post
to the database. If you remember here, our
message schema has a sender, recipient and content.
The time stamp we don't need to fill
in ourselves but we do need to figure
out how we're getting the sender, how we're
getting the recipient, and how we're getting the
content. Some of those will come from the
front end but some of them might not.
So I'll give you guys a few minutes
to think about that and try to implement
the API request yourselves. And let us know
if you have any questions as well. If
you guys are still working on it, no
worries. I wanted to pull for to see
how you guys were thinking about each of
these. So maybe we'll do a quick open
hand, close hand. Let's do open hand if
you think that sender will be coming from
the front end and then close hand if
you think that sender is going to be
coming from our back end instead. Do you
have any ideas? Let's do the same thing
for recipient. Do we think that recipient is
going to be coming from the front end
or from the back end? Open hand for
front end and then close hand for back
end. Cool. And then lastly for content, do
we think content is front end or content
is coming to us from the client? Or
is content something that the back end fills
in itself? Okay. Cool. Yeah. Okay. I think
everybody agreed on the first two sorry, the
last two for recipient and content. The back
end can't really know who you're sending the
message to or what content you're putting into
the message unless know unless the client tells
them exactly what these are. But for the
sender, the back end actually of fills this
in itself, kind of gets it from the
front end. But essentially what's going on is
the front end session that it stores with
the back end from auth will be used
to fill in the sender field. So the
back end will be doing this itself. So
that means that recipient and content will come
from rec. Query, but sender will be a
little bit different. I'll do it right here.
So we need to do a router. Post
slash message. So we just need to post
a message to the database. We can kind
of copy here what we've done in comment.
Instead we'll be creating a new message. So
that'll look like this. And then afterwards we
want to save the new message. And we
don't need to worry about sending it back
to the server because we're going be doing
that in the next workshop. For now, we
can just imagine that the server responds with
silence. So to fill in the fields, we
need a sender, a recipient, the content. The
timestamp we don't need to fill in ourselves.
So the content, we can just get from
rec. Body. So rec. Body will be a
message object. And that will have a recipient
and a content. So we can just define
const message object equals rec. Body. Now content,
we can just fill in with rec. Body
dot sorry, message object dot content. Recipient, you
can also fill in using message object dot
recipient should have the correct formatting as already.
And then sender, we'll need to fill in
the ID and name separately. So before that
oh, sorry. Yeah. We have a middleware implemented
which fills in the rec dot user with
a user object. In auth. Js, we've set
up a way for essentially our rec. User
to be populated by whatever is stored in
our current session. So here we'll just do
rec. Userid. And then our name is going
to be the name of the Rectal user
as well. Yeah, so just to recap, the
recipient and content are coming from rec. Body
and then the sender is coming from rec
dot user. Moving on, we're going to be
doing 4.2. Now we're going be calling the
apimessage endpoint from the front end. This will
just be a new post input. And here
we have a value. And the value is
the content of the message that we want
to post. And then we want to build
a message object. So we should think about
what fields this message object has and then
we'll call the endpoint using the post function.
Again, I'll give you guys a few minutes
to do that. Let us know if you
have any questions. Okay. I will be doing
this step up on the board so everybody
can see. We want to just call the
post function with this endpoint. And the field
that we need to feed in is a
message object. Value is essentially like the content
of our message. So we can start by
filling in the content, which is just value.
And then the other thing that a message
object needs is this sender. Oh, wait. Sorry.
The other thing that the slash api slash
message thing needs, I think I might have
confused it a little bit, but we do
need a content and a recipient here. And
the recipient is going to be user object.
For now, we'll just fill in the recipient
with All Chat. Okay. Yeah. So for now,
we'll just send every message that we have
to All Chat since we haven't implemented individual
chats yet. But hopefully now we should be
able to post messages to the server. We
probably won't get a response yet. How this
will basically work, hopefully. Yeah, I'm seeing peoples
already. I'm kind of talking into the void
right now because I'm not getting a response
back from the server. But if I refresh,
then hopefully I do see my message here.
Yeah. Cool. Yay. So just to recap, what
we did was we implemented this API request
in slash message. And then on the left
hand side we are posting to sorry, we're
calling the post request with the contents of
the we're feeding in a content and a
recipient. And then on the right hand side,
we're receiving this post request from the client.
Sorry, the client feeds us in the content
and the recipient of the message and we
need to fill in from our side the
sender using the rec dot user field of
the request. And then we save the message
to the database so that it persists. Yeah.
Okay. So here's the solution here. So you
can see the quote unquote final product of
the workshop. If you just check out workshop
six complete. And coming up we're going to
make Chatbook Live Update. So the server will
be able to tell all the clients that
it just received a message and then all
the clients will be able to see the
message directly on the client. For now, as
you can see, if I just type something
in here, I will not get anything back
from the server nor will I see my
message reposted here. But we will be working
on that in the next workshop. It's kind
of a hassle to have to refresh every
single time you want to see something. Yeah.
Any questions before we break and transition? Okay.
Yeah. We'll be transitioning then. Everyone can take
a two minute stretch break while we transition
to our next lecture.